---
layout: post
title: Our World
comments: none

---

{{ page.title }}
================

<div>
We'll end up numb from playing video games  <br/>
and we'll get sick of having sex. <br/>
And we'll get fat from eating candy <br/> 
as we drink ourselves to death.  <br/> <br/>

We'll stay up late  <br/>
making mix tapes, photoshoping pictures of ourselves <br/>
while we masturbate to these pixelated videos <br/>
of strangers fucking themselves. <br/> <br/>

We are very busy people, <br/>
We are very busy people. <br/><br/>

There's crusty socks <br/>
and stacks of pizza boxes <br/>
making trails straight to the bed. <br/>
And when we're done sleeping <br/>
we'll stay busy dreaming of the things <br/>
we don't have yet. <br/>
Well there's a long, long list of chores <br/>
and shit to do before we play, <br/>
oh let's just piss away the day.(piss away the day) <br/>
Crank call the cops down at the station, <br/>
just for friendly conversation, <br/>
requesting songs they never play; <br/>
Let's hear the one that goes like: <br/><br/>

We are very busy people,<br/>
We are very busy people;<br/>
But we've always got time for new friends.<br/><br/>

So come on over and knock on our door,<br/>
it's open whatchu waitin' for?<br/>
We might be sprawled out on the floor,<br/>
but we still make lovely company.<br/>
Pull up a chair, I'll pour some tea,<br/>
We'll shoot the shit, 'bout everything,<br/>
till you get sick of politics,<br/>
and flip on the TV screen,<br/>
we stare at the TV screen.<br/><br/>

That Donnie Darko DVD has been repeating for a week,<br/>
and we know every single word.<br/>
(Every single word).<br/>
I've got an iPod like a pirate ship,<br/>
I'll sail the seas<br/>
with fifty thousand songs I've never heard-<br/>
And all the best of them go<br/>
Fa la la la la la...<br/>
Fa la la la la la...<br/><br/>

We are very busy people,<br/>
We are very busy people;<br/>
But we've always got time for new friends.<br/>
Yeah.<br/>
Fa la la la la la...<br/>
Fa la la la la la... <br/><br/>
</div>